This post will delve into the usage of the Git CLI from a user's perspective. It will cover basic usage such as cloning, pulling, pushing, and will touch on how the commands interact with the index and object store of the repository.

---
# Creating a repository #

There are two different ways to establish a repository in Git in contrast to other version control systems where there is only creating the initial repository.

In Git we are also able to clone a repository to create copy containing all of the objects and history from an existing repository.

#### Initialising a new repository ####

This is how we can create a brand new Git repository which may either be empty, or contain data/files already.

In order to initialise a new repository we simply use the init subcommand while inside the root folder we want to turn into a repository. For example if we want to make a brand new one.

```
mkdir repo
cd repo
git init
```

Of course, the repo folder need not be empty, and the steps would be the same to initialise an existing folder as a repository.

#### Cloning an existing repository ####

Git is also able to easily make a clone of an existing repository which will copy all of the objects and history across with it, but allows branching and commits to this new repository independent of the source one.

In open source development, this is the most common way, as a developer will make a clone of the central repository in order to make their own fixes that they can then request to be merged back into the central/online repository.

In order to clone a repository we can do

```
git clone <path-to-repository> repo
```

Where path-to-repository can either be a relative or absolute path to another local repository on the machine or something more exotic such as a URL.

The most popular way to clone is using the GitHub URL to the repository.

---
# Adding and removing files #

In order to add and remove files to the repository, one can use the add and rm subcommands, along with a set of files to add or remove.

When a file is added or removed however, it is not immediately added to the repository, or removed from the repository but only *staged* as a change to make to the repository.

In order to add a file that is either currently untracked by the repository, or has been edited and needs updating in the repository, we can do the following

```
git add file_to_add.txt
```

And we can remove a file that is currently tracked by the repository also

```
git rm file_to_remove.txt
```

This will add or remove the file from the staged change as mentioned previously

---
# Viewing staged changes #

We can use the subcommand **status** to display the list of files that have been staged to be added or modified, the list of files staged for removal, and the list of files that Git has found in the folder that aren't tracked yet.

This last type is the state that a file will be in when you first create it and add it to the folder (or a subfolder), but before it's been staged for addition with the add subcommand.

For example, after the following sequence of commands where we add a file, and then remove a file:

```
git add file_to_add.txt
git rm file_to_remove.txt
```

We will see the following when we ask for the status:

```
git status
On branch master
Changes to be committed:
  (use "git restore --staged <file>..." to unstage)
        new file:   file_to_add.txt
        deleted:    file_to_remove.txt

Untracked files:
  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
        untracked_file.txt
```

---
# Committing staged changes #

Once we've added and removed files to the stage, and we are ready for the repository to be updated to reflect the changes, we will need to perform a *commit* operation.

When we commit to the repository, we are required to give a message identifying the changes that were made.

We can either do this by specifying it on the command line to the commit subcommand as follows:

```
git commit -m "Committing some changes"
```

Or, for more detailed messages, they can be composed in a text editor. To do this, just use the commit command without specifying the message:

```
git commit
```

Which will then open the default text editor where you can type a more detailed message, save, and exit - the commit will then be applied.

Once staged changes are committed, using the status subcommand again will show that the stage is up to date with the repository, this state is referred to as *clean*.

---
# Configuration #

The subcommand *config* can be used to specify various parameters affecting the operation of Git. Before you can make a commit, Git needs to know your name and email address as a minimum.

These can be set as such:

```
git config user.name "Name Here"
git config user.email "myemailaddress@example.com"
```

---
# Viewing commits #

The *log* subcommand will allow us to see the history of commits done to the repository. They will be displayed from most recent to the oldest, since Git always keeps the head of the commit chain and accesses the others from there.

Each entry will show the commit hash, along with the author name/email, the date of the commit, and the message.

For example after doing two commits to a repository, we may see something like the following on the command line:

```
git log
commit 2f988a4223baa3d8bd1db16f8cc777181eb390cd (HEAD -> master)
Author: Robin Firth <theforgottenmaster@googlemail.com>
Date:   Sat Nov 6 19:34:57 2021 +0000

    Changed the text from "Some text" to "Changed text"

commit 18dd164cf53fdb05bb757d3e0b452c4bfcf0b38a
Author: Robin Firth <theforgottenmaster@googlemail.com>
Date:   Sat Nov 6 19:33:55 2021 +0000

    Initial commit
```

An individual commit can be viewed with the *show* subcommand. This is useful if you are given a commit hash in conversation with someone and you want to see what was changed in that commit.

For example, to see the initial commit above we can use show and see the following:

```
git show 18dd164cf53fdb05bb757d3e0b452c4bfcf0b38a
commit 18dd164cf53fdb05bb757d3e0b452c4bfcf0b38a
Author: Robin Firth <theforgottenmaster@googlemail.com>
Date:   Sat Nov 6 19:33:55 2021 +0000

    Initial commit

diff --git a/file_to_add.txt b/file_to_add.txt
new file mode 100644
index 0000000..9dbfeee
--- /dev/null
+++ b/file_to_add.txt
@@ -0,0 +1 @@
+Some text
\ No newline at end of file
```

This shows the same information as in the log, however also shows the file differences that were part of that commit.

---
# Diffing commits #

If you have any 2 commit hashes, you can easily determine the diff that is applied to the first commit, in order to reach the second commit.

For example, in order to see the diff that was applied between the initial commit, and the second commit above, we will use the command and see something like:

```
git diff 18dd164cf53fdb05bb757d3e0b452c4bfcf0b38a 2f988a4223baa3d8bd1db16f8cc777181eb390cd
diff --git a/file_to_add.txt b/file_to_add.txt
index 9dbfeee..41c4a21 100644
--- a/file_to_add.txt
+++ b/file_to_add.txt
@@ -1 +1 @@
-Some text
\ No newline at end of file
+Changed text
\ No newline at end of file
```

And we can see fromm the diff that "Some text" was removed, and "Changed text" was added in its place.

---
# Renaming files #

We could achieve the same result as a rename by removing the file, renaming it, and adding it back again, however there is a Git command for renaming or moving a file. For example if we want to rename file_to_add.txt to renamed_file.txt, we can do so as follows:

```
git mv file_to_add.txt renamed_file.txt
```

A move can be achieved by keeping the destination filename the same, but specifying the folder that it should be placed under.

After the above rename, running git status shows:

```
On branch master
Changes to be committed:
  (use "git restore --staged <file>..." to unstage)
        renamed:    file_to_add.txt -> renamed_file.txt
```

---
# Advanced configuration #

There are actually 3 levels of configuration for the Git config subcommand
1. Repository-specific. These are the default level if you use the config subcommand without specifying one of the others. These will take precedence if set and override any system or user level configuration settings.
2. User-specific. These are next lowest in the hierarchy and if not overridden will be applied for all repositories for that user only. These are set by using the --global option.
3. System-wide. These are the lowest priority and if not overridden will apply to all repositories, of all users on that system. This is specified with the --system option.

#### Example: setting name ####

For an example, we'll show setting the **user.name** configuration setting we showed before, at the 3 levels of configuration.

1. Repository-specific
```
git config user.name "User Name For This Repo Only"
```

2. User-specific
```
git config --global user.name "User Name For All Repositories For This User"
```

3. System-wide
```
git config --system user.name "User Name For Everybody"
```

#### Viewing configuration settings ####

We can view all the set configuration settings by passing the "-l" flag to the config subcommand. Which will display something like the following:

```
git config -l
diff.astextplain.textconv=astextplain
filter.lfs.clean=git-lfs clean -- %f
filter.lfs.smudge=git-lfs smudge -- %f
filter.lfs.process=git-lfs filter-process
filter.lfs.required=true
http.sslbackend=openssl
http.sslcainfo=C:/Program Files/Git/mingw64/ssl/certs/ca-bundle.crt
core.autocrlf=true
core.fscache=true
core.symlinks=false
core.editor="C:\\Program Files\\Microsoft VS Code\\bin\\code.cmd" --wait
pull.rebase=false
credential.helper=manager-core
credential.https://dev.azure.com.usehttppath=true
init.defaultbranch=master
user.email=theforgottenmaster@googlemail.com
user.name=Robin Firth
core.repositoryformatversion=0
core.filemode=false
core.bare=false
core.logallrefupdates=true
core.symlinks=false
core.ignorecase=true
```

#### Unsetting a configuration setting ####

The *--unset* flag can be passed to unset a specific configuration setting at any of the three levels (by omitting, or including either --global or --system flags). For unsetting the user.name setting for example at all levels, we could do:

```
git config --unset user.name
git config --unset --global user.name
git config --unset --system user.name
```

---
# Aliases #

You can set your own aliases for more complex commands in Git. This allows you to run complex commands with a shorter subcommand.

For example we can make an alias which will commit with a default message, and run it:

```
git config alias.default-commit -- "commit -m 'Default commit message'"
git default-commit
```
