We want to be able to rotate the turret on the tank now to face where the mouse cursor is in the world.

In order to do this we'll make a new method **RotateTurret** on the ATank class.

---
# RotateTurret Method

This should take a vector location which to face (we'll pass in the hit point from the mouse cursor trace for this!).

```cpp
void RotateTurret(FVector LookAtLocation);
```

Then, when we implement this, we can determine what the target **rotation** should be with the following.

```cpp
const FVector LookAtVector = LookAtLocation - TurretMesh->GetComponentLocation();
const FRotator LookAtRotation = FRotator(0.0, LookAtVector.Rotation().Yaw, 0.0);
```

That is:
- Get the rotation representing the vector from the turret mesh location to the target location.
- Get the (world space) rotator representing the rotation of this vector.
- Extract the yaw value only from the rotation, and set the other components to 0.

This ensures that the turret only rotates around the yaw axis and doesn't rotate in any other axis to follow the cursor.

We don't want to just set this rotation directly however else we get snapping of the turret. We instead want to interpolate the rotation over time, with some speed.

We can do this with a function provided in the math library for us **RInterpTo** which gives us some rotation between the current and target, based on elapsed time and speed.

```cpp
const FRotator CurrentRotation = TurretMesh->GetComponentRotation();
const double DeltaTime = UGameplayStatics::GetWorldDeltaSeconds(this);
const float InterpSpeed = 5.0f;
const FRotator InterpolatedRotation = FMath::RInterpTo(CurrentRotation, LookAtRotation, DeltaTime, InterpSpeed);
TurretMesh->SetWorldRotation(InterpolatedRotation);
```

---
# Calling The Rotate Turret Method

We'll just be calling it inside the Tick method when we get a valid hit result (replacing the drawing of the debug sphere).

```cpp
RotateTurret(HitResult.ImpactPoint);
```

Validate in editor to make sure that the turret does indeed rotate correctly.