Now that we have a way to detect hits, we need a way to track the health that the actor has.

Go ahead and create a C++ class called **HealthComponent** which should derive from **ActorComponent**. This is because we want to attach it to an actor, but we don't want any hierarchy or anything like that - this component is only tracking data.

---
# Adding Variables

The health component will have two variables:

- **Health** => This tracks the current health that the actor has. It doesn't need to be publicly accessible/visible as it's only updated internally.
- **MaxHealth** => This is how much health the actor starts with. Will need to be editable in the editor so it can be set if needed to something else.

After adding these variables, it looks something like this (in the header for HealthComponent)

```cpp
private: 
	UPROPERTY(EditAnywhere)
	float MaxHealth = 120.0f;
	float Health;
```

---
# Initialising Health

In the BeginPlay method, we'll want to be setting the initial value of Health to whatever MaxHealth is set to.

```cpp
void UHealthComponent::BeginPlay()
{
	Super::BeginPlay();

	// ...
	Health = MaxHealth;
}
```

---
# Adding the HealthComponent

Won't bother showing that here, use the Add menu to add the new HealthComponent to our **BP_PawnTank** and **BP_PawnTurret** blueprints.

---
# Making The Damage Taken Callback

We want to declare a callback function that will be registered for damage being taken. This needs to be marked with the UFUNCTION macro.

```cpp
UFUNCTION()
void DamageTaken(AActor* DamagedActor, float Damage, const UDamageType* DamageType, AController* Instigator, AActor* DamageCauser);
```

The parameters taken are as follows.

- **DamagedActor** => This is the AActor that received the damage. Useful in case we bind the callback function to multiple target actors.
- **Damage** => The amount of damage that was taken.
- **DamageType** => The type of damage that was taken.
- **Instigator** => This is the controller (PlayerController, AIController, etc.) that is responsible for initiating the damage.
- **DamageCauser** => This is the actor (if any) that was responsible for actually causing the damage.

We then implement it with an empty body for now.

```cpp
void UHealthComponent::DamageTaken(AActor* DamagedActor, float Damage, const UDamageType* DamageType, class AController* Instigator, AActor* DamageCauser)
{

}
```

---
# Binding The Callback

Finally we go ahead and bind the callback in the BeginPlay method.

We bind it the same way as we did when [[18. Detecting Projectile Hit#Binding The Callback|detecting hits]]

```cpp
GetOwner()->OnTakeAnyDamage.AddDynamic(this, &UHealthComponent::DamageTaken);
```

The target actor for the damage taken callback will be our health component's actor.

We use the **OnTakeAnyDamage** event/slot.

```cpp
GetOwner()->OnTakeAnyDamage.AddDynamic(this, &UHealthComponent::DamageTaken);
```