Eventually we'll want a countdown when the game starts and after the countdown expires, we want to enable input for the player.

The countdown UI will be done in the future, but for now we can add a method to the GameMode that can be called (currently from BeginPlay). This method will:

1. Disable player controller
2. Start timer
3. After timer expires, enable player controller.

---
# Adding A Constant For Delay

First is adding a constant for the delay we'll have (in seconds) before the game actually starts. Here it's set to 3 seconds. This is defined in the game mode header.

```cpp
static constexpr float StartDelay = 3.0f;
```

---
# Adding HandleGameStart

Next is adding the HandleGameStart method. We also call this from BeginPlay for now!

```cpp
void HandleGameStart();
```

Can start off by moving the code that's currently directly in BeginPlay into this method and calling the method.

```cpp
void AToonTanksGameMode::HandleGameStart()
{
	Tank = Cast<ATank>(UGameplayStatics::GetPlayerPawn(this, 0));
	Controller = Cast<AToonTanksPlayerController>(UGameplayStatics::GetPlayerController(this, 0));
	if (Controller != nullptr)
	{
		Controller->SetPlayerEnabledState(false);
	}
}
```

This also disables the player from the get-go.

---
# Adding A Timer To Enable

When we [[14. Making Tower Shoot#Setting The Timer|previously]] created a timer, we simply wanted to invoke a callback every X seconds without any parameters.

If we want to pass parameters to a callback from a timer, we need to make a delegate first.

Firstly we make a timer handle as we did before.

```cpp
FTimerHandle PlayerEnableTimerHandle;
```

Secondly we can make the delegate. We do this with **FTimerDelegate::CreateUObject**.

This static function creates a delegate for us and takes the usual receiver object and callback function pointer, but also allows us to pass our own custom parameters.

```cpp
FTimerDelegate Delegate = FTimerDelegate::CreateUObject(Controller, &AToonTanksPlayerController::SetPlayerEnabledState, true);
```

Finally we can start the timer as we previously did the same way by registering it with the global timer manager.

```cpp
GetWorldTimerManager().SetTimer(PlayerEnableTimerHandle, Delegate, StartDelay, false);
```

The false is of course saying that we don't want the timer to loop.

---
# Testing

We currently don't have any UI showing the countdown for the game, but when the game starts input is disabled.

After the timer runs out, it will invoke the delegate, which routes through to the **AToonTanksPlayerController::SetPlayerEnabledState** method, and passes the true value through.

The effect is that the user input should be enabled after 3 seconds (along with the crosshair mouse cursor).