# Overview #

Supervised learning is a branch of machine learning that can be described as finding patterns or relationships in data that has already been measured. The "supervised" part of the phrase comes from the fact that we need to monitor the output that the system gives for a given input and to tell the system how close or far away it is from the measured result.

As a short example, suppose we looked at 100 houses and measured both their square footage and market value. We know both the input (square footage) and the output (market value), however we want to use machine learning to discover the relationship between square footage and market value in a way that can be applied to houses not in this training set.

We give the system one of the measured square footage values, it gives us an output that it calculates as the market value. Since we already measured the market value in the sample, we can tell the system how close it is (or far away) from the answer we expected and it can correct.

This will go around in cycles through all samples in a process called training, until the system reliably gives us an answer for each input that is within a certain tolerance of the correct answer. At this stage we can consider the system trained and can apply it to new inputs.

---
# Representation #

Once we have the set of *features* that we have measured (a feature is simply one measurement about a sample that we care about. These must be numerical and represent anything, such as for example, the square footage of a house, or it's price).

We can represent our sample set as a matrix of numbers, with each column being a single *feature* of a sample, and each row in the matrix being a single *record*.

Since we can represent the sample set as a 2D matrix of numbers, we can then apply the mathematics of calculating the derivitives of functions, and any other mathematical operations on the set in a homogenous way, regardless of what those numbers actually mean. It's just *data* and the interpretation we apply to the matrix makes it *information*.

---
# Goal #

The goal of supervised learning is to discover relationships in input data that map it to some output data. In practice, the output will be a single feature of the measurements called the *target*. 

In the case of the set of data about houses, the target may be selected to be the price of the house. This will let us train the system so that given the other input data (the features about the house), we can predict the price of the house. Thus, uncovering the relationships between features like square footage or number of bedrooms, and the price.

---
# A More Accurate Definition #
After the above descriptions, we can now define a more accurate definition of supervised learning.

The goal of supervised learning is to find a mathematical function that takes an input matrix (set of samples) and produces a vector as output that is *close enough* to a target vector.
