Although dynamic UBOs allow us to keep all the model matrices together for our entities, in order to update the data in them we need to map the memory, write to the memory, and unmap the memory. This process of writing to memory is particularly slow and for frequently changing data (like a model matrix for our spinning cubes), it is too much of an overhead. However, Vulkan gives us a pathway to a small amount of fast memory which we can put our model matrices into. These are called **Push Constants**.

---
# Push Constants #

A push constant is a very small object similar to a UBO however it has the following properties:
- 128 byte maximum in most cases
- Can only have **1** push constant per shader
- Requires re-recording the command buffer if the data changes

This last point is most important - since this is where it differs from a traditional UBO. With a regular UBO, the command buffer records the buffer in use, and offsets/strides to be used - however the data inside the buffer is able to be changed at any time by the application **without re-recording the command buffer**.

However a push constant directly records the data to be passed to the GPU into the command buffer itself. This necessitates a re-recording of the command buffer whenever the data changes (in our case each frame).

This may sound like a lot of overhead, and an expensive task to re-record the command buffer, however in Vulkan such an operation is actually really fast, since it's only recording the operations to be executed, and not actually executing them - until the command buffer is submitted to a queue.

---
# Resettable/Re-recordable Command Buffers #

By default, any command buffers that come out of the command buffer pool are configured to be only recorded once - and then submitted multiple times. Attempting to record a command buffer that was previously recorded is an error, however Vulkan allows us to *opt-in* to this ability.

All we need to do is to simply pass a flag to the command buffer pool creation to let Vulkan know we are intending to reset and re-record the buffers obtained from it. This uses the **RESET_COMMAND_BUFFER** flag and the code for pool creation looks thus

```rust
fn create_command_pool(device: &Device, queue_family_index: u32) -> Result<CommandPool> {
    unsafe {
        device
            .create_command_pool(
                &CommandPoolCreateInfo::builder()
                    .flags(CommandPoolCreateFlags::RESET_COMMAND_BUFFER)
                    .queue_family_index(queue_family_index),
                None,
            )
            .context("Failed to create a command pool.")
    }
}
```

Then, when we tell Vulkan we're beginning to record the command buffer, it will perform a reset for us first.

We do need to change the function that records the command buffers though. Previously we were recording **all** the command buffers for the frames, and the function didn't have a way to record only some of them. We modify the function to take in the current image index to operate on.

We don't need to record the command buffers up front now - instead just recording a particular frame's command buffer before drawing it which we can do with a call to the record_command_buffer function and passing in the current index

```rust
record_command_buffers(
	&device,
	command_buffers,
	framebuffers,
	render_pass,
	swapchain_extent,
	graphics_pipeline,
	&meshes,
	&descriptor_sets,
	pipeline_layout,
	image_index as usize,
)?;
```

---
# UBO => Push Constant #

Next, we need to update both the vertex shader and the code to reflect that we're now using a push constant instead of a UBO. For the shader, this change is necessary and results in the following declaration

```glsl
layout(push_constant) uniform PushModel {
    mat4 model;
} m;
```

Notice that instead of a binding number, we have the keyword **push_constant** in the layout declaration. This is because, as mentioned previously we can have only a single push constant per shader, so it doesn't need a binding number. This is *the* push constant for this vertex shader.

Updating the name of the data in code however isn't required because the *structure* of the object is the same. However we will change the name UboModel to PushModel for clarity

```rust
#[repr(C)]
struct PushModel(Mat4);

struct Mesh {
    vertex_buffer: Buffer,
    vertex_buffer_memory: DeviceMemory,
    index_buffer: Buffer,
    index_buffer_memory: DeviceMemory,
    index_count: usize,
    push_model: PushModel,
}
```

---
# Updating Descriptors #

Since we're no longer using a separate UBO for the model data and are using a push constant instead, we will need to remove the dynamic UBO definition from our descriptor set.

The first thing is to change the layout so that we are only binding a single UBO again (for the projection and view matrices)

```rust
fn create_descriptor_set_layout(device: &Device) -> Result<DescriptorSetLayout> {
    unsafe {
        device
            .create_descriptor_set_layout(
                &DescriptorSetLayoutCreateInfo::builder().bindings(&[
                    *DescriptorSetLayoutBinding::builder()
                        .descriptor_type(DescriptorType::UNIFORM_BUFFER)
                        .descriptor_count(1)
                        .stage_flags(ShaderStageFlags::VERTEX),
                ]),
                None,
            )
            .context("Failed to create a descriptor set layout.")
    }
}
```

Likewise, we don't actually need to tell the descriptor pool to allocate these dynamic UBO descriptors as they're not used. The pool will therefore go back to using only a single descriptor type for our UBOs

```rust
fn create_descriptor_pool(device: &Device, count: u32) -> Result<DescriptorPool> {
    unsafe {
        device
            .create_descriptor_pool(
                &DescriptorPoolCreateInfo::builder()
                    .max_sets(count)
                    .pool_sizes(&[
                        *DescriptorPoolSize::builder()
                            .ty(DescriptorType::UNIFORM_BUFFER)
                            .descriptor_count(count),
                    ]),
                None,
            )
            .context("Failed to create a descriptor pool.")
    }
}
```

Finally the *pipeline* layout needs to be updated to be compatible with our push constants. Specifically, we need to tell Vulkan what the push constant *ranges* are that we are using.

A PushConstantRange will let Vulkan know, for each range:
- Which shader stage(s) that push constant data is used for
- The **offset** of the data for those stage(s) - this is the offset in bytes from the beginning of the block of data pushed to Vulkan
- The **size** of the data used for those stage(s)

In our case, we have:
- Push constant data is only accessible by the **vertex** shader stage
- We will start pulling the data from the **beginning** of the block (offset 0)
- We will use a number of bytes equal to the size of our PushModel structure

In code then, when setting up the pipeline layout and specifying this range, we have what looks as follows

```rust
fn create_pipeline_layout(
    device: &Device,
    set_layouts: &[DescriptorSetLayout],
) -> Result<PipelineLayout> {
    unsafe {
        device.create_pipeline_layout(
            &PipelineLayoutCreateInfo::builder()
                .set_layouts(set_layouts)
                .push_constant_ranges(&[*PushConstantRange::builder()
                    .stage_flags(ShaderStageFlags::VERTEX)
                    .size(std::mem::size_of::<PushModel>() as u32)]),
            None,
        )
    }
    .context("Error trying to create a pipeline layout.")
}
```

---
# Recording the Command Buffer #

Finally everything is set up! just to recap:
1. The vertex shader is set up to use a push constant data block
2. The pipeline layout knows the format of the push constant data to pass to the vertex shader
3. Descriptor sets no longer allocate the dynamic UBOs for our model matrices

Now we just need to record the push constant data into the command buffer. We re-record the command buffer each frame, just before submitting it to the queue for presentation.

When we record the command buffer we can use the `cmd_push_constants` command to provide the data to be used for push constants.

In our case we'll get the push_model from the mesh, and interpret it as a &[u8] slice which is what Ash is expecting to receive.

The amount of bytes will be the size of PushModel again and in Rust we can use the `std::slice::from_raw_parts` function to get a slice with a particular length. The whole code for that is as below

```rust
let push_constant_ptr = &mesh.push_model as *const PushModel as *const u8;
let push_constant_size = std::mem::size_of::<PushModel>();
let push_constant_bytes =
	std::slice::from_raw_parts(push_constant_ptr, push_constant_size);
device.cmd_push_constants(
	command_buffer,
	pipeline_layout,
	ShaderStageFlags::VERTEX,
	0,
	push_constant_bytes,
);
```

And then re-running the application we can see it works the same! However it's now using the much faster memory to push the model matrices to the shader instead.