As a small detour before we talk about the final structures required for a basic and usable deep learning API, we will talk about making the Network\<T> type cloneable. As we will find out when we talk about the trainer, we need to be able to take a **snapshot** of the neural network for us to restore to at a later date. This requires us to be able to call the **clone()** method to obtain a duplicate. However as we'll soon see, this is problematic and requires a clever trick.

---
# The Problem #

Okay, so we want to add the ability to clone a Network\<T> for taking a snapshot when training. This seems simple enough and, at least for the Network itself we can use the derive macro in order to automatically implement Clone in the case that all members implement Clone. The definition is simple enough:

```rust
#[derive(Clone)]
pub struct Network<T> {
    layers: Vec<Layer<T>>,
    loss: Loss<T>,
}
```

Okay...

As mentioned, Network will be clonable if all its component parts are clonable. In this case we have a Vec<Layer\<T>> and a Loss\<T> that are required to be clonable. Vec<Layer\<T>> will be clonable if Layer\<T> itself is clonable.

This means that we need to make sure that both Layer\<T> and Loss\<T> implement Clone (when T itself implements Clone of course).

Let's take a look at making Loss\<T> clonable as it's simpler. Firstly we'll hop over to the definition of Loss and add the derive attribute there too:

```rust
#[derive(Clone)]
pub struct Loss<T> {
    implementation: Box<dyn LossImpl<T>>,
    prediction: Option<Array<T, Ix2>>,
    target: Option<Array<T, Ix2>>,
}
```

Now we take a look again at the members.

1. prediction and target are Options which will implement Clone if the underlying type implements Clone. In this case the underlying type is an Array which will implement Clone in the case that T does. These two members are fine and not an issue.
2. implementation is a boxed trait object. Box\<T> implements Clone if T implements clone. T in this case is "dyn LossImpl\<T>". However, this is where we have an issue. **trait objects don't implement Clone**.

This is one such location, however there are a few locations where we have a boxed trait object that we would like to clone. The complete list of such types in the library is:

1. Loss
2. LayerSetup
3. BasicOperation
4. ParameterOperation

All of these types are held in boxes as trait objects, and all need to support the ability to be cloned.

---
# Why doesn't clone work? #

Let's take a little look at *why* trait objects can't implement Clone. The reason is pretty simple really. Let's first look at the definition of the clone method as required by the Clone trait:

```rust
fn clone(&self) -> Self;
```

That is, it is called on an immutable reference to an instance, and must return a new instance **by value** of the same concrete type (Self). However, in the case of a trait object which is dynamically sized - the compiler cannot determine the concrete size at compile time of, for example **dyn LossImpl\<T>**.

The compiler however, **needs** to be able to calculate how many bytes are required in order to allocate the correct memory on the stack for the clone.

Therefore we hit one of the rules of trait objects in Rust:

**Traits that have methods returning "Self" cannot be made into trait objects**

---
# Workaround #

So, how can we make sure that we are able to clone our trait objects?.

Well, we don't need to be able to implement Clone for the trait objects themselves (e.g. dyn LossImpl\<T>), but instead we should realise that we only ever store them inside a Box. This means that what we *actually* need to do is to implement Clone for **Box<dyn LossImpl\<T>>** (or Box<dyn LayerSetup\<T>>, etc.)

So how can we do this?, well there's nothing actually stopping us from implementing Clone on the boxed trait object. A Box\<T> is always a known size, even when T is dynamically sized because a Box is just a pointer. Therefore we start to write this out:

```rust
impl<T> Clone for Box<dyn LossImpl<T>> {
    fn clone(&self) -> Self {
        Box::new(???)
    }
}
```

Of course, we run into an issue here, since we know how to create a new Box with Box::new. However, we need to provide a new and concrete instance of the underlying type to the constructor. However our underlying type is "dyn LossImpl\<T>" so we run into the same issue we had before.

#### How can we solve this? ####

Well, we can use another trait to get a newly constructed Box with a newly cloned object inside and use that as such:

```rust
impl<T> Clone for Box<dyn LossImpl<T>> {
    fn clone(&self) -> Self {
        self.clone_box()
    }
}
```

So, what does this trait look like?. It's simple enough and almost the same as Clone, except it returns the Box<dyn LossImpl\<T>> directly. This allows us to do any cloning internally where it would know about concrete sizes, etc. The trait looks as follows:

```rust
pub trait LossImplClone<T> {
    fn clone_box(&self) -> Box<dyn LossImpl<T>>;
}
```

#### Slight problem ####

The eagle-eyed will notice that this trait is LossImplClone\<T> and not LossImpl\<T>, however in the implementation for Box<dyn LossImpl\<T>> we are calling clone_box directly on the Box. This will pass through to calling it on the dyn LossImpl\<T> trait object internally.

How can we possibly call a method from our new trait when we have an instance of a different trait?, well, we need to make LossImpl\<T> a **subtrait** of LossImplClone\<T>:

```rust
pub trait LossImpl<T>: LossImplClone<T> {
    ...
}
```

The compiler will then know that, if we have a trait object of type LossImpl\<T> then it will also be implementing LossImplClone\<T> which means that we can call functions from that trait when we have an instance of the subtrait.

#### Implementing LossImplClone\<T> ####

The only thing remaining is to actually implement the new LossImplClone\<T> which is required by all LossImpl\<T> implementors.

Rather than requiring every implementation of LossImpl\<T> to manually implement this trait which is very boilerplatey, we can instead use Rust's ability to do a **blanket implementation** and implement this trait for all valid types as such:

```rust
impl<T, U> LossImplClone<T> for U
where
    U: 'static + LossImpl<T> + Clone,
{
    fn clone_box(&self) -> Box<dyn LossImpl<T>> {
        Box::new(self.clone())
    }
}
```

For all concrete types, U, such that they already implement LossImpl\<T> and Clone themselves, and have 'static lifetime we can provide the implementation of LossImplClone\<T> for them. This implementation just constructs a new box and clones self to put inside it.

The bound on LossImpl\<T> and Clone is fairly self-explanatory however a brief comment could help to understand why the 'static bound is required for the type we're implementing this clone trait for.

The reason is because we are able to implement traits on any type in Rust, and references are first-class citizens in the type system. Therefore, we could if we wanted, implement LossImplClone\<T> for a *reference*. These references obviously have a lifetime that's tied to the stack generally.

This means that Rust won't let us create a Box with that data. If it did, we could create a Box with a short-lived reference in it. Since we have no lifetime information in the trait, we can't guarantee that the type U lives for at least as long as the returned Box will live.

Therefore Rust won't compile this program without the 'static bound.

The 'static bound ensures that we're only implementing this for concrete types, and not references, and allows us to actually put the data inside a Box as we require.

#### All together ####

And that's the workaround, but it would help to look at it all in one place:

```rust
pub trait LossImplClone<T> {
    fn clone_box(&self) -> Box<dyn LossImpl<T>>;
}

impl<T, U> LossImplClone<T> for U
where
    U: 'static + LossImpl<T> + Clone,
{
    fn clone_box(&self) -> Box<dyn LossImpl<T>> {
        Box::new(self.clone())
    }
}

impl<T> Clone for Box<dyn LossImpl<T>> {
    fn clone(&self) -> Self {
        self.clone_box()
    }
}
```

---
# Conclusion #

We were able to make the various boxed trait objects we're using implement Clone through a little workaround using the trait system, and ultimately was able to make Network\<T> itself implement Clone. We'll see in the next post how we make use of that to take a "snapshot" of the Network for rolling back/early termination of the training process.